ANDI presented its 2021 economic overview and 2022 outlook
eco 2022
PreviousNext

Share
2021 ended with an economy that registered significant growth despite the pandemic. However, we must continue moving toward recovery: increasing formal employment, promoting an increase in "Inclusive Productivity" in investment, and reactivation. Hopefully, this situation will be an opportunity to make decisions that are still pending for our economy.

2021 Overview and 2022 Outlook

The last two years show a rupture in economic history. We talked about economic cycles, trends that strengthened or reversed, or referenced temporary crises around the world. The challenge was to be productive, inclusive, and competitive, to integrate into global value chains, and to adapt to the fourth industrial revolution. The scope went beyond the economic to social, environmental, and human rights issues. These remain priorities.

However, it is clear that new conditions must be addressed, and one example has been the pandemic, which can be considered a turning point, including its economic dimension. Given this scenario, how will 2021 be characterized? One possibility would be to talk about a new normal, a reconfiguration of global value chains, the perfect storm, or the digitalization of the economy.

But fortunately, 2021 has also been the year of recovery. The world managed to overcome an economic contraction of -3.1% to place itself on a path of high growth (5.9%), where dynamism has been greater than expected. In Colombia, the recovery was evident with one of the highest growth rates in the region.

Economic Facts

The global economy is framed by three events: a public health environment, the disruption of supply chains, and economic stimulus in the recovery. 2020 saw significant loss of life. In 2021, the vaccination strategy has been the focus, taking into account new variants and the need to adjust health systems and financial sustainability due to health conditions.

International trade achieved dynamism that exceeded expectations. Restrictions on raw materials, shortages of semiconductors, energy resources, and containers are evident, and trade volumes have been insufficient to meet demand. Shipping companies have also lacked availability and port infrastructure had adjusted to the 2020 situation.

The result of 2021 is global inflation, rising freight and logistics costs, and shortages of intermediate inputs and final goods. Many forces are converging toward increasing inflationary pressure. It is important to recognize this when defining the public policy that, as a country, must adopt to address inflation. Facing domestic price increases is not the same as facing global situations.

Governments have responded to this. The economic policy mix has been an expansionary monetary policy accompanied by economic support for households and assistance for businesses to avoid closures. This was primarily the case in 2020, and many have suspended it for 2021. Recently, monetary policy, as an initial measure to control inflation, has seen rates rise.

In Colombia, the health challenges, raw material restrictions, and inflationary pressures are being replicated, with the government responding with aid to the population and the monetary authority adjusting its policies to market conditions. We cannot forget the effects of the national strike on the productive apparatus and the logistics and trade structure.

The country's growth in 2021 is reflected in several sectors and, from a spending perspective, is positive: consumption is driving the economy, reflecting an improvement in households; investment is growing, indicating business confidence in the country; and industrial exports are recording their highest growth in almost a decade. This is a clear transition toward recovery.

The role of the business community was overwhelming.

Over these two years, the business community, beyond maintaining its activity in an environment of confinement, uncertainty, and depressed markets, has been characterized by a supportive attitude and a deep awareness of society's needs. During the discussions surrounding tax reform, they asked the government and Congress not to affect those hit hard by the pandemic and invited business owners to address the country's significant fiscal needs through corporate taxes.

At the negotiation table, an agreement was reached raising the minimum wage to $1,000,000, as well as the transportation assistance to 10.07%. This was accompanied by the need to protect workers, communities, and their families, by purchasing 2,100,000 doses of COVID vaccines, complementing the national plan.

to the government's vaccination program. Thus, the business community continues to invest in the country, always seeking the well-being of Colombians.

The Challenges Ahead

The pandemic exacerbated the Colombian economy's existing difficulties. Unemployment is in double digits. The challenge is to create formal jobs and train personnel for new production needs. The government responded to the situation with a fiscal package that raised the deficit to levels above 7% of GDP. Another major challenge would be the soundness and sustainability of public finances.

Looking ahead, the need to align economic policy measures with those associated with the health sector will continue to be a critical issue. The digital transformation remains as a legacy. E-government has intensified, and procedures are increasingly digital, workers have adjusted to teleworking, virtual education has been introduced, and the business community has become digital and has come to recognize the importance of Big Data and the need for real-time indicators for decision-making.

Shock policies must be maintained to strengthen recovery and translate into job creation for economic and social development. The goal cannot simply be a short-term objective.

2022 must be the year in which a path is defined for structural reforms: pensions, labor, capital markets, justice, and a tax system that promotes formality, along with a law that clarifies land ownership and use, and a regulatory system for prior consultations with clarity and transparency. It will probably be impossible to advance these reforms in one year, but a mechanism for discussing them and a timeline for processing them must be agreed upon.

We must resume the path toward greater productivity and competitiveness. We must consider the new values ​​demanded by consumers and the new paradigms of competitiveness: human rights, environmental sustainability, decent work, the elimination of child labor, and digital transformation.

Colombia's Great Opportunity

The global need to reduce its carbon footprint presents a new opportunity for Colombia's competitiveness in international markets. The low carbon footprint of our energy matrix and our geoeconomic position is undoubtedly a great opportunity to attract investment to the economy. In this regard, the country is not starting from scratch: it has natural competitive advantages, it is already developing a strategy to reduce its carbon footprint, the path toward energy reconversion is a reality, and business leaders are incorporating sustainability issues into their strategy.

If a company wants to reduce its carbon footprint, if it wants to be sustainable, it should locate in locations that allow it to do so. Energy is a large part of the strategy, and therefore, it must be located in Colombia. Thus, its production will be carried out with lower-emission processes, the geographic location will mean shorter distances traveled to access international ports, cargo and personnel will be able to use electric mobility, and public policy will be aligned with the sustainability objective.